---
title: Beware of JavaScript arrow functions
id: 20211010
lastUpdated: 20211010
description: "Many JS developers use arrow functions by default, but they aren't 100% equivalent to classic functions. Avoid bugs by learning the differences"
published: true
tags: ["gotchas", "language features", "this"]
includeInSimilar: true
---

Arrow functions are a fantastic addition to JavaScript. However, I've noted that many devs use arrow functions only. They seem to think that it's "the new way" to create functions, while using the `function` keyword is "the old way". 

But that's not correct, **arrow functions aren't 100% equivalent to classic functions.** There are subtle but important differences that can cause big headaches if you aren't aware of them.

**In classic functions, the value of the `this` keyword is dynamic, because it depends on how you call them.**

If you call a function as the method of an object, `this` refers to that object. But if you call a function as a regular function (i.e. not as an object's method), `this` represents the global object (or `undefined` in strict mode.)

```javascript
myObject.myMethod(); // this == myObject
myFunction(); // this == global object or undefined
```

With classic functions, you call them using the `new` keyword. In this case, you'll create an object and `this` will refer to that new object.
```javascript
// this == the new object
const myObject = new ConstructorFunction();
```
Also, you can manually **set the value of `this` using the `.bind` method** (functions in JavaScript are objects). It doesn't change the original function, but it returns a new version with the new value for `this`.

```javascript
const boundFunction = normalFunction.bind({name: "Bob", age: 40});
normalFunction(); // this == global object or undefined
boundFunction(); // this == {name: "Bob", age: 40}
```

You can't do anything of this with arrow functions.

In arrow functions, it's often said that they "have no `this`". **The value of `this` in an arrow function is "inherited" from the context where the function was created.**

It means, if you create an arrow function in the global context (i.e. not inside an object or a function), `this` refers to the global object or `undefined` in strict mode. If you declare an arrow function inside a class, `this` is the instance of the class.

And if you declare an arrow function inside another function, it will have the same `this` as the outer function.

```javascript
// Declaring an arrow function in the global context
// this == global object or undefined
const sayHello1 = () => "Hello";

class MyClass {
  // Declaring an arrow function in a class
  // this == object
  sayHello2 = () => "Hello";
}

function outerFunction() {
  
  // Declaring arrow function inside
  // another function
  // this == the same value as in outerFunction
  const innerFunction = () => "Hello"
}
```

And the most important thing, **you can't change the value of `this` in an arrow function.** Even `.bind` fails silently! Calling this method won't throw an error, but it will return a new version of the function... with the same `this` as the original.

```javascript
// Declaring an arrow function in the global context
// this == global object or undefined
const sayHello = () => "Hello";
sayHello(); // this == global object or undefined

const sayHello2 = sayHello.bind({ name: "Alice", age: 30 });
sayHello2();  // this == global object or undefined
```

Another difference occurs when declaring methods inside a class.

If you declare class methods the "standard" way, the same function will be reused among all instances of that class. But if you use arrow functions, every time you create a new instance, a new copy of the function will be created for that instance.

It's important to say it again, arrow functions are a fantastic addition to JavaScript. **If the function body is a simple expression or if you don't want to deal with the `this` keyword, they are very useful.** You just need to know when to use them.