---
title: "Strict mode in JavaScript"
id: 20220703
lastUpdated: 20220703
description: ""
published: false
tags: ["javascript features", "compatibility", "best practices"]
includeInSimilar: true
---

JavaScript wasn't originally created as a full-fledged programming language. It's original purpose was to add some interactivity to web pages. It was created as a very flexible language, forgiving to those who are new at programming.

However, the language started to be use in more complex contexts, that "sloppiness" started to become a problem. Complex software requires language to be more restricted because it makes it easier to maintain.

For that reason a new mode was introduced to the language, this is the strict mode.

## How to access strict mode

One way to enable strict mode is by putting the string `"use strict";` in the first line of the JavaScript file.

Another way is to use native JavaScript modules. If you're using Node.js, modules are JS files with the filename extension *.mjs* rather than *.js*. In the browser, you should add the attribute `type="module"` to the `<script>` tag.

Code inside classes is always under strict mode too.

## What changes under strict mode

Under the previous mode (often called "sloppy mode", but it's not an official name), you can create variables without declaring them with `const`, `let`, or `var`:

```javascript
name = "Stephanie";
console.log(`Her name is ${name}`);
```
In the old sloppy mode, the first line is correct, it creates a new variable called `name`. But under strict mode, it throws an error.

The problem with creating variables without declaring is that if you reassign an existing variable but you add a typo, you end up creating a new variable without realizing.

Under sloppy mode, many errors were swept under the rug. They didn't work, but the code continued running as if nothing happened. For example:

```javascript
var undefined = true;
var NaN = 25;
delete Object.prototype;
```
In the examples above, you're messing with built-in objects and keywords of the language. You can't change or delete them, but in sloppy mode, these changes are ignored. If you run this code under strict mode, it will throw errors.

Another big difference occurs with [the `this` keyboard](https://nicozerpa.com/why-does-this-work-like-this). When you're calling a function which is not a method of any object, in strict mode the value of `this` is `undefined`. Under "sloppy mode", the value of `this` was the global object (i.e. in the browser, the `window` object.)

```javascript
"use strict";
function logThis() {
    console.log(this);
}
logThis(); // Outputs undefined
```
```javascript
// sloppy mode
function logThis() {
    console.log(this);
}
logThis(); // Outputs [object Window]
```

## When to use it
Nowadays, it's highly recommended that you always use strict mode. The only caveat is that if you are dealing with older code that doesn't use it, you shouldn't necessarily switch to strict mode until you fix all possible errors.